Three-dimensional (3D) reconstruction of a scene based on its photographs forms a vast stratum in contemporary computer vision. State of the art provides no common technology capable of arbitrary object's dense 3D reconstruction by a set of photographs taken from unknown viewpoints. Sparse reconstruction of rigid scenes is well studied so far. A software reconstructing camera trajectories and 3D model of a scene as a point cloud is available [1]. However subsequent triangulation of such models cannot be accurately done without human interaction [2]. Moreover, it is not always possible to achieve automatic reconstruction even significantly reducing a class of objects to be processed [3]. 
3D reconstruction of human face occupies a separate, rather vast, niche in the indicated area. Research on this topic can be divided into two large classes: geometry oriented and morphable model oriented. 
Geometry oriented approaches mostly rely on establishing correspondence between points in different photographs of an object; surface reconstruction is then performed by determining such location of points in 3D space and such camera parameters which fit in the best way to the point correspondence. Such approaches require either substantial organizational development: special camera positioning and tuning, special illumination conditions, or significant amount of manual work: indication of point correspondence, segmentation of scene objects etc. 
Morphable model based techniques utilize analysis-through-synthesis approach. 
A morphable model of human face can be depicted as a box with tunable handles. 
Depending on positions of those handles the box generates one or another picture of one or another human face. The problem is to set handles of those box to such positions that it would generate exactly the input image, or at least the closest possible. A 3D shape of a face is uniquely determined by positions of those handles or, speaking more precisely, by parameters of the morphable model. An ability to reliably reconstruct a 3D shape of a human face even by single photograph is a considerable advantage of such approaches. 
V. Blanz and T. Vetter's research [3] on design and use of a morphable model of human face is one of the most well known works in the area. They have managed to design an accurate morphable model and implement an efficient scheme of particular individual's face 3D reconstruction by one or several images. Their approach is based on a conjecture that a set of all possible 3D shapes of human face is convex in a sense. Loosely speaking, by averaging two shapes of different faces one gets a shape of some human face as well. Under this assumption, one can design a basis out of 3D shapes of several typical faces, and approximate a shape of an arbitrary face by a convex combination of those basis shapes. Then a problem of human face 3D reconstruction based on its image consists in search for such a convex combination of basis shapes and such camera and illumination parameters, under which a generated image is least different from an input. A problem statement of such sort is a classical instance of analysis through synthesis approach. 
Nevertheless, a method suggested by V. Blanz and T. Vetter contains a number of considerable drawbacks. The first one consists in the fact that for construction of the morphable model and its further service basis models should be textured. The paper does not contain any reference for the case of untextured models. Meanwhile, bases of untextured models are much more available as compared to textured ones. Thus, it is reasonable to design a 3D reconstruction technology which makes use of just untextured models. 
One more remarkable shortcoming of the technology is that for accurate surface reconstruction one needs to specify initial approximation of orientation and illumination rather precisely. This drawback is vital for technology usage in fully automatic systems where any human interaction is impossible. 
A number of research efforts, carried out mainly by commercial companies, addressed to overcome the aforementioned drawbacks of V. Blanz and T. Vetter's technology. 
A method, suggested in [4], is based on detection of silhouettes on images of a face, and search for such a convex combination of basis shapes which fits best to those silhouettes. Invariance to illumination is an advantage of this approach. However it is achieved by loss of considerable amount of information, so that accurate surface reconstruction becomes possible only with very huge number of images. Not to speak about 3D reconstruction of a face by single image. 
A method [5] is suggested for reconstruction of facial shape by series of slightly different photographs. It is founded on feature point tracking, based on which a camera position for each image is retrieved and a rough approximation of 3D shape is made. Further, images are pairwise rectified with respect to camera positions in order to use a stereo reconstruction algorithm to refine the model. The fact that the method works only with those series of images which can be arranged in such a way that each subsequent picture does not differ much from the previous one is a substantial drawback of the method, as well as its inapplicability in the case of single input image. 
A method [6] is designed for 3D reconstruction of human face by two slightly different photographs and two video sequences. The method performs a search for such a convex combination of basis shapes, which fits best to location of some feature points in a pair of input images. Video sequences are used for an accurate model texturing. The facts that the method works only for a pair of slightly different images, is not applicable in the case of single input image, and requires manual indication of large number of feature points are considerable shortcomings of the technique. 
In present paper we suggest a method for 3D reconstruction of human face which does not have just the aforementioned drawbacks. 
Morphable model of human face 
A morphable model of human face can be depicted as a box with tunable handles. Depending on positions of those handles the box generates one or another picture of one or another human face. This box contains handles of three types (fig. 1). Some of them are charged with 3D shape of the surface (α), another are charged with camera position (β), the other are charged with illumination (γ). Let us admit, that by depicting facial shape, camera position and illumination as handles of that box, we virtually claim that all these quantities can be described by finite number of parameters. 
Camera position is indeed specified by finite, moreover, small number of parameters. It is not that easy in case of illumination and 3D shape. In further subsections we will consider the means to parameterize a set of 3D shapes of human face. At present, let us consider illumination parameterization. 
Illumination model 
Let us suppose that surface is lit by single directional light source, i.e. a source which shines from infinity with parallel beams of light, and is specified by single vector d; direction of the vector indicates light direction, and its length defines light intensity. Brightness of a surface in some point t is defined as a scalar product of normal to the surface in this point and vector d: 
added to the brightness of all surface points:  Let us suppose that there exists so called ambient light as well. It is just a constant 
Let us take a gander what happens if we have two directional light sources rather than one. Then brightness of some surface point (not taking into account ambient light) equals to: 
Equation (2) can be obviously rewritten as
Thus, in this illumination model no matter we have single light source, two, or thousand of them. All these sources are equal to some single light source. 
Thus, we have parameterized illumination by a vector d and a scalar c: 
γ = {d, c}. (4) 
Convex combination of faces 
We assume that a set of 3D shapes of human face is convex in a sense. Loosely speaking, by averaging two surfaces which are faces one gets a face as well. 
Suppose we have a collection of surfaces representing some typical human faces. We call them basis shapes. Let us assume that these basis shapes can be represented as points in some linear space. The means of doing so will be described in section 2.4. We approximate a shape of an arbitrary human face by convex combination of the basis shapes:  Convex combination coefficients are parameters of facial shape α. But what exactly should be meant by averaging of two surfaces? Let us clarify it on a very simple example. 
Morphable model of rectangle 
Suppose that we would like to design a morphable model of rectangle. Let us do so in the following way: represent any rectangle as a convex combination of those, shown in fig. 3. If we consider each of introduced rectangles as a function of a single variable and average these functions, we come up with a function depicted by thick line in fig. 4, which, obviously, is not a rectangle. It has happened because we had averaged semantically different points. If we specify a proper mapping between points of the two basis rectangles, that is, map a point A of the darker rectangle to a point A' of the brighter rectangle, map a point B to a point B', and uniformly map all points of a segment AB to a segment A'B', then we get a correct averaging (fig. 6). Indeed, a point A'' is just half way along the points A and A', and point B'' is exactly in the middle between the points B and B'. 
Thus, in order to get a rectangle by averaging two rectangles, one needs to average semantically identical, i.e. correspondent, points. This reasoning is also applicable for the case of much more complicated curves in 2D plane and surfaces in 3D space. In particular, it is applicable for surface of human face. 

